---
title: "A Summary of Girard's Triangular Desire"
date: 2020-03-24T06:59:05-04:00
draft: true
---

Triangular desire, aka mimetic desire, the precursor to mimetic theory,
is a model of understanding human desire.  It is fundamentally simple,
and states that a subject copies the desires of his model.

In the literay terms of 'Deceit, Desire, and the Novel,' it refers to
the "self" copying the desire of the "other."

Through this model it is possible to form an analysis of human
behavior through literature and other forms.  While triangualr desire
is reductive in application, it's power as a model comes from it's
simplicity. 

Girard refers to these copied desires as *metaphysical desires*.
Fundamentally, the subject's desire is aimed at appropriating the
being of the Other.  The object which appears to be desired is only a
means of reaching the mediator (Other).

The base example Girard uses in DDATN is Don Quixote, whose case is
most obvious.  Don Quixote imitates his model of chivalry, Amadis of
Gaul, in his effort to practice the essence of knight-errantry.
Further works exposing the operations of metaphysical desire are less
obvious.  Not every hero declares his model, or character his
role-model.

Girard separates the operation of the mediation of desire primarily
into the categories of *internal* and *external* mediation.  The two
categories refer to the distance of the mediator from the subject in a
"spiritual sense." Don Quixote's imitation of Amadis of Gaul, or a
Christian's imitation of Christ, are examples of external mediation.
His other examples (works I haven't read) are more examples of
internal mediation: *The Red and the Black*, *Notes From the
Underground*, *Proust*, and so on.  The mediator in these works is
more close than far.

Through triangular desire and the characteristic *double mediation* of
*internal mediation* it is possible to represent complex forms of
behavior and emotion from a base analysis of desire.  The deceptive
complexity of behavior becomes simple with the exposition of
metaphysical desire in literature.

Inherent in triangular desire is the transfiguration of the object.
The object increases or decreases in "metapysical value" based upon
the mediator.  Complicating the analysis at times is the vague notion
of what the "object" can be.  While Don Quixote is a comedy through
his tormentor's enchantments, and a barber's basin becomes Mambrino's
helmet, more *real* examples, found in internal mediation, manifest
differently despite the same base operation.  In internal mediation,
the object loses its importance in the analysis the more the proximity
of the mediator increases.

Girard explores vanity, snobbism, masochism, sadism, and
individuality, through the lens of triangular desire, revealing the
(ironic) equivalance of Quixote's transfigured barber's basin as
helmet to the common snob's behavior.  The mechanism is the same, but
the distance to the mediator results in the difference of perception
and ultimately behavior.

While I would think that most people would not assert the fundamental
equivalance of passion and vanity, that is what Girard's model does.
All is dependent upon the distance from the mediator. Perception,
behavior, and reality (which springs from illusion) in Girard's model
arise from metaphysical desire. Modeling reality from literature (in
the beginning was the Word...) and claiming it springs from illusion
requires some nuance, as there is a \*physical\* reality obviously,
though the separation I'm sure will be endlessly debated.

With an understanding of the mediation of desire, and *double
mediation,* it appears to be possible to understand a modeling of the
roots of emotions and behaviors prevelant within contemporary life.

The operations of double mediation (A copies the desire of B, B in
turn copies the desire of A) conceal the nature of the model
through the subjects denial of their admiration and imitation.  The
hated rival is in fact in some ways an admired model and double
mediation plunges its victims into the abyss of rivalry.  As the
distance of the mediator decreases, the potential for rivalry
increases, the deceit and duplicity grows, and the results of double
mediation grow worse.


Double mediation, and internal mediation, result in a perpetual
copying of desire.  Each desire begets a duplicate desire, and through
this a rivalry can emerge.  

Don Quixote and Amadis of Gaul are not rivals due to their "distance."
Sancho's desire to govern an island is suggested by Quixote, but they
still are not rivals -- they operate in separate lanes of metaphysical
reality.  Their mediation is external and doesn't result in rivalry.

Contrast the same mediation of desire under the internal modeling, in
*The Tale of the Inappropriate Curiosity*, included within Don Quixote
by Cervantes, and the same mediation, operating between "friends" in the
context of "love," has a vastly different appearance and outcome: the
death of Anselmo, instead of the comedy of the windmills.

Deviated transcendency, the inverson of vertical transcendency, the
imitation of the false idol instead of the divine, has diabolical
consequences.

Anselmo schemes to have his "friend" Lotario seduce his wife in a vain
effort to validate her virtue in the "expected" case of her denying
Lotario's advances.  The outcome is different however, and Anselmo's
offering to his rival, instead of frustratig his rival and affirming
his wife's virtue, results in a "successful seduction" and Anselmo's
downfall.

Double mediation, in operation between the "friends," rears it's ugly
head in this case.  Anselmo's desires become Lotario's desires and
vice versa, and the originally hidden rivalry becomes apparent and
it's conclusion tragic instead of comic.

Metaphysical desire is contagious and Girard terms it's spread as the
*ontological disease.*  In DDATN Girard explores the progression of
the disease through contemporary time with an exploration of
literature exposing it's operation and progression.

In Girard's explanation the progression of literature is reflective of
the stages of the ontological disease and the novelists awareness of
this reality. According to Girard, despite the apparent gulf between
*Don Quixote*, *Notes From the Underground,* and other works he
discusses, Cervantes, Proust, Stendhal, and Dostoyevsky, all perform
the same act ultimately: they reveal the existence of metaphysical
desire.  Girard calls this the *novelistic revalation.*

In *Don Quixote,* this operation is fairly obvious.  Don Quixote's
imitation of Amadis of Gaul and his chivalric exploits in practicing
knight-errantry are absurd and comic.  Through the mediation he
participates in, the common reality shared by the priest, various
innkeepers, Duke's, and others, is contrasted with the absurd
enchantments Don Quixote experiences.

The *novelstic revalation* is performed by contrasting metaphysical
realities.  In the case of *Don Quixote,* this is pretty easy to see.
The contrast between the books of chivalry which form the basis for
Don Quixote's reality, and the reality of the priest, for example, is
a relatively straight forward example.

The absurdity of Don Quixote's enchantments become comic not out of
some fixed "true reality" of which he alone is excluded and truly
insane within in an absolute sense.  They are absurd and comic because of the
incompatible realities shared by the characters (and readers) and the
conflicting transfigurations of reality.

Through a contrast of the realities of the characters wihin the novel,
a process *suggested* implicitly, not explicitly, the maleable nature
of metaphysical reality and desire becomes apparent.  Coupled with the
model of triangular desire, many apparent "complexities," "archtypes,"
and other notions become reducible within the literature itself to the
same fundamental operation: the mediation of desire.

The ultimate result of metaphysical desire is enslavement, shame, and
suffering.  Don Quixote's desires are not his own, and while his
exploits are hilarious, nobody would want them for their own.

The question of freedom, although not the question of the
exestential nature of individuality, is resolved by Girard through the
*novelistic conclusion,* which is the renunciation of the hero's
former self, the renunciation of metaphysical desire.

Don Quixote renounces knight-errantry and the folly of his ways in the
end.  Don Quixote's freedom comes ironically at the point of his death
in the novel.

Freedom, seen through the Girardian lens, is in the renunciation of
metaphysical desire, and the selection of a divine model instead of a
human model.






> Every hero of a novel expects his being to be radically changed by
  the act of possession.

The study of metaphysical desire as undertaken in DDATN is important
due to the outcome of its mediation.  The mediation of desire, and the
ontological sickness (the increasing proximity of themediator),
ultimately lead to shame, slavery, and suffering.  The novelistic
revelation, and the confirmation of the existence of metaphysical
desire seems to validate certain "spiritual lessons," such as in
Buddhism, which states that desire and ignorance lie at the root of
suffering.

The model of triangular desire allows the analyst to examine
novelistic works and relate the structure and results of the
metaphysical desire in a systematic fashion.  Girard does this and
structures his analyis by exploring the spread of the ongological
sickness through a review of literature termed "novels of mediated
desire."

The model of triangular desire, and the "existence" of metaphysical
desire, allows for the untangling of the complex into the simple.  It
appears, at least from a method of analysis relegated to literature,
that imitated desire allows for the operation of certain emotions and
behaviors to be understood at a base level.

The reality of mediated desire (if accepted as correct) appears to
throw much contemporary thinking into disarray.  The very notion of
individuality and freedom is called to be examined (as DDATN does),
and the fundamental questions it poses, such as the difference between
passion and vanity (is there ultimately a difference here?), among
others, are not easy to answer.

Girard's grand theory, mimetic theory, to come after DDATN and built
up from mimetic desire, is, ironically, not anything new.  In fact
through his work he draws readily on literature and other sources to
show the existence of this reality through time.  In my opinion, the
beauty of Girard's approach is that through his deductive process and
exposition he makes this reality more palatable for those less
religious and spiritually inclined.  His model makes the spiritual
scientific, and he proves his theorem using literature.




There apparently is "real science" which corroborates the operation of
triangular desire, or at least the imitation of behavior, found in the
existence of mirror neurons.





The necessity of this revelation in the novelistic universe is
important.  Since the object is not the actual aim of desire, it's
acquisition ultimately results in disappointment.  The fruits of
metaphysical desire are bitter in general.  The expected
transformation doesn't take place when the object is acquired.

Following the novelistic revalation, the novelistic conclusion, at
least with regards to "novels of mediated desire," end with the
renunciation of metaphysical desire.  The hero repudiates his
mediator, and a new relationship with the self and others is born.
This result can take any number of forms, typically however it
resembles the hero adopting solitude, or rejoining society with a new
outlook.

Inherent in Girard's reasoning is that we all operate under the guise
of a model.  In Girard's reasoning true freedom lies in the choice
between a human or divine model.  As Girard puts it in the first
chapter: *The aesthetic emotion is not desire, but the ending of all
desire, a return to calm and joy.*

The novelistic revelation of the existence of metaphysical desire, and
it's ultimate result of suffering and slavery, is not dissimilar from
many spiritual teachings.  Such as in Buddhism - desire and ignorance
lie at the root of suffering.

What triangular desire allows the critic to do is to reveal the
structure of metaphysical desire and it's operation in a systematic
method.  In a way, through the use of literature (and later religious
texts and cultural analysis), it confirms aspects of what can be
referred to as religious or spirtual teaching.  In a round-about way,
Girard uses literature and triangular desire as a way of revealing 

As a model of analysis it also reveals errors in conventional thought,
and poses serious questions about the nature of individuality and
equality.  What does it mean to be passionate? Or vain?  Is there
ultimately a difference?

The presence of the mediator distorts the subject's sense of reality.
For example, the barber's basin which Don Quixote takes to be
Mambrino's helmet.  Quixote's mediator, his perfect model of chivalry,
Amadis of Gaul, through which Quixote's reality is transfigured,
results in the hilarious escapades of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza.

But who, ultimately, is to say that Don Quixote is a madman?
Quixote's model is clear, he reveals his imitation of Amadis of Gaul,
the perfect mirror of chivalry, the essensce of knight-errantry.  But
while Quixote is a madman, the characters who follow him around in his
adventures and enchantments are the sane -- grounded in reality.
Beside's Sancho and his desire to govern an island (which comes from
Quixote), the other character's mediators are not as clearly sourced.

Girard begins his analyis of metaphysical desire with Quixote in
*Deceit, Desire, and the Novel,* likely because Quixote confirms the
model easily.  There is no question that Quixote's desires are the
desires of Amadis of Gaul.














