---
title: "Book Review: Reinventing the Sacred"
date: 2021-07-05T08:02:50-04:00
draft: false
series: book-review
description: "My take on Stuart A. Kauffman's book 'Reinventing The
Sacred.'"
tags: [book-review]
keywords: [book-review]
---

*Reinventing The Sacred,* by Stuart A. Kauffman, concerns itself with
two main tasks: first, showing that life isn't reducible to physics by
itself; and, second, making a plea that the notion of God and the
sacred needs to be brought to the secular community.

Both of these tasks which the book details are important, and should
appear important after reading this book, if they didn't already seem
important to the reader beforehand.  In a world where it seems that
people struggle for meaning in their lives, working to refute the idea
that life is ultimately reducible to physics is a worthwhile endeavor,
and it's one of the things Kauffman does well in this book.

Despite this, it wasn't a book that I was crazy about.  While I'm not
opposed to reading about science at all, this book was filled with
theories and ideas which did more to show off potentials than show
what actually is.  I suppose that this makes sense, and perhaps is
good, in that it shows just how little "Science" is able to actually
explain the world and life.  The *Galilean Spell,* as Kauffman calls
it, which is the idea that everyone and everything is reducible to
deterministic physics is deeply ingrained in peoples thinking of the
world. Kauffman takes the time to show this notion is deeply flawed,
and in doing so takes some liberties in exploring different theories
and ideas.  In fact, much of the books is detailing these theories
which Kauffman or others have, showing potentialities which exemplify
Kauffman's take on a non-deterministic world.

A lot of the book is Kauffman describing different scientific
theories, spanning the range from biology to quantum mechanics, and
different ideas that he has about the nature of these things.  In
places it's interesting, but in more than one spot I caught myself
scratching my head not really having the energy or desire to follow
along with what he was talking about.  I'm already sold on the idea
that all of life isn't going to be ultimately shown to be an equation
which simply reduces everything to some particle or whatever.
Kauffman seems sometimes to be writing more to people who believe that
it either is reducible to this already, or will be.

The other main task of the book, making the case that a notion of God
needs to be brought to the secular science community occupies much of
the rest of the book.  Kauffman makes the case that life on the planet
can of course be explained scientifically, and without the need for
there to be a "Creator God" as many religious people point to.  In fact
he shows this throughout the book, discussing evolution and biology.
However, he also seems convinced that the idea of God, and the sacred
needs to be reintroduced to the secular community in order to bridge
the communication gap between the more religious people in the world.

Kauffman's proposes adopting certain ideas about God and the sacred
which would allow for this to happen for people who don't believe in a
"Creator God."  He for most of the book and perhaps even in the end
limits his notion of the sacred to positive, creative, and beautiful
qualities of life and holds that these essential qualities are sacred
and should be treated as such.  He makes a case that "reinventing the
sacred" and holding God as a source of creativity in the world can be
done, without needing to submit to the idea of a "Creator God."
Obviously, or I think obviously, many people won't like this -- both
people who are religious, and people who are secular.  Kauffman argues
that he thinks it is important to do this however, and use the
language of sacred and God, to build a bridge centered on the positive
qualities of the sacred.

It's here that I was left really wanting by the book.  Kauffman's
discussion of the Sacred, or God, and spirituality to me seemed naive
for the purposes of actually evaluating anything even close to
"reinventing the sacred."  To me, the book is much more about not
falling into the nihilism which must come from reductionism.  In fact,
the notion of the sacred is not clearly defined for the purposes of
the book. It seems like Kauffman more or less positions it as things
that society reveres and appreciates.  Personally, for me, to go into
something as abstract a task of "reinventing the sacred," the book
should have looked at the function of the sacred and how it affects
groups and communities.  I actually think that Kauffman must not have
read anything about Mimetic Theory, because my guess is this book
would be totally different if he had.

Kauffman's take on performing his goal seems to be nothing more than
building a language for common appreciation and communication between
groups and peoples.  I don't doubt that his position and his feeling
that the notion of the sacred being missing from the scientific
community comes from something that is quite real.  I also don't doubt
at all that a lot of this comes from the thinking that everything is
reducible to physics and genetics.  From what I've seen, it isn't
possible to even describe the complexity of life fully in an equation,
let alone make the assertion that it is totally reducible to physics.
Another book, *Life Itself*, by Robert Rosen, spends a whole book just
showing that biologists can't adequately describe what an organism
is.  He clearly demonstrates that in no way is the machine metaphor
capable of modeling a living thing fully.

Overall, I don't think I would recommend this book to anybody, unless
you really like reading about science.  I thought the writing was so
so, and I also thought a lot of the calls for "reinventing the sacred"
were really over the top to the point where they may even be
considered cliches.  The ground Kauffman tries to tackle is
interesting, but I don't think he did well enough by the "sacred" part
of this book.  The science part is much more clear and interesting,
although it does take a little more focus than I had to get through
it.  To be fair, I'm probably not the target audience for the book.
It seems to the average scientific reader Kauffman is thinking of they
would still be suffering from what he called the *Galilean Spell.* 










