---
title: "Book Review: Love and Justice"
date: 2021-03-28T09:32:09-05:00
draft: false
series: book-review
description: "My book review of Rienhold Niebuhr's Love and Justice, a
collection of his essays on this topic."
tags: [niebhur, book-review, justice, philosophy]
keywords: [niebhur, book-review, justice, philosophy]
---

*Love and Justice* is a collection of essays written by Rienhold
Niebuhr.  Most of the essays are written near to or during World War
II, and span the topic of love and justice both on a general,
national, and international scale from the standpoint of a Christian
theologian.

As an atheist I still find room to appreciate Niebuhr fairly easily,
both intellectually and morally, because the topics he covers and the
"morals" invoked really transcend Christianity and are applicable to
anybody who is interested in society, justice, and either progressive
or conservative ideas.  Niebuhr has a nack for presenting his position
in a way that is interesting regardless of your religion.

I am by no means knowledgeable on topics that delve deeply into
Christianity itself, and before reading Rene Girard held organized
religion as a whole as something kind of stupid.  However, Girard's
compelling theory as to why religion exists made me revisit the stupid
part of it, and also revisit some of the ideas and the bias I had
against certain aspects of religion.

All in all, I don't believe that some all-powerful being in the sky
simply created man in seven days after watching a YouTube tutorial.
However, after reading Girard I do believe the Bible has a wealth of
information on humanity which would be foolish to ignore.

So I picked up a few Rienhold Niehbur books and let me tell you they
are very interesting to read.  I think five or six years ago I
wouldn't have given them a second glance once I found out Niebuhr was
a Theologian, but thankfully, that has changed.  No, I still don't go
to Church on Sundays, and definitely consider myself an atheist, at
least in the sense concerning the YouTube video God from above.

Out of the Niebuhr books I've read so far, I think this one has the
most Christian tinged writing, and I think that is because it's a
series of essays and some of them are written as critiques of
different Christian organizations of the time.  So the whole religion
and God part comes through clearly.  There is also an essay which goes
relatively far into Jesus and the idea of love.

That said, I thought it was interesting regardless, because once you
get passed the #hashtag #memed out version of words such as 'love,'
there is quite a bit more nuance and thought required. From the
standpoint of the large-scale (which is generally what Niebuhr writes
on) this book goes into quite a bit of that detail.  And, to be
honest, living in America, or Western Civilization in general, I think
you're crazy to write off all of Christianity's impact on society as
solely stupid and bad.  While the Church has done many wrongs, there
are also positive aspects to religion.  You can read Niebhur to see
some of it.

> The effort to substitute the law of love for the spirit of justice
  instead of recognizing love as the fulfillment and highest form of
  the spirit of justice, is derived from the failure to measure the
  power and persistence of self-interest.

One of Niebuhr's common themes in his writing that I've discovered is
his constant reminder of self-interest, and at the same time
humanity's ability to forget the power of it.  The above quote
highlights quite a bit of what this book covers in a general sense.
How is it possible to support war in the light of Christian teachings?
It's questions like this that Niebuhr spends considerable time on in
this book.  Niebuhr himself is known for having changed his position
on the use of force throughout his life.

A large portion of the book is Niebuhr detailing his opposition to
pacifism despite it's strong Christian basis.  He goes into quite a
bit of detail on why he thinks it is the wrong approach within the
context of intervening in World War II to stop the Nazis.  It's also
interesting to read this from a historical perspective, and see how
portions of the United States were not sold on intervening in the war.

> We should have long since have known that there are no clear choices
  between good and evil in the realm of politics and economics.

This is another quote from the book, and as the essays in *Love and
Justice* show, there is no simple right and wrong.  At least from the
perspective that Niebuhr sees the world.  Although he does write
compellingly in many of the essays for his position, with the forceful
clarity of somebody who believes they are right.

The book covers a number of topics besides World War II, including:
Christians fooling themselves, realism, social justice, racial issues,
war, pacifism, and the complex issue of justice overcoming oppression.
It's an interesting read on a wide ranging number of moral and social
issues which continue to plague America and the world in modern times.

A few more quotes from the book:

> We cannot disavow the use of power because it is hazardous, but
  neither must we obscure the moral peril of power.

> We have a right to view the social and personal consequences of an
  action in retrospect, but if we view it in prospect we have
  something less than the best.

These two quotes also provide a context for which many of the essays
operate within.  Niebhur is not an advocate in these essays for the
disavowal of power -- in fact, in the case of Nazism, he pushes
strongly for fighting, despite the strong pushback from the pacifists
who are also Christian.  He also shows the "moral peril" of power, and
how it is difficult for the oppressed to use power and violence
without becoming tainted with it's use.  It's clear from reading this
that there is no way to push back against oppression and wrong without
getting your hands dirty.

The second quote directly above is always relevant, and it was fun to
read these essays now, given that they have aged 60-80 years.  It's a
reminder now that it's hard to prejudge actions and know how it will
come out.  These essays were written during or shortly after one of
the most traumatic periods in world history, and at the time Niebuhr
advocated for intervention strongly.

> Love must be regarded as the final flower and fruit of justice. When
  it is substituted for justice it degenerates into sentimentality and
  may become the accomplice of tyranny.

Overall this is a good series of essays written in an engaging and
interesting way.  It would be nice to find a contemporary Rienhold
Niebhur to read about modern events.
