---
title: "Book Review - The Little Book of Common Sense Investing"
date: 2018-09-01T11:38:22-04:00
draft: false
tags: [
      "book-review"
]
---

I'm not a serious investor and for the most part don't follow the day
to day doings of the stock market and bond market to know what's going
on.  I'm not the best saver in general, although I have contributed to
401k accounts where I've worked.

Recently, after a realization that I'm not going to win the lottery,
or make millions of dollars a year in business, I've reconciled to the
fact that I'll be working for a living for the next 30+ years or so.
This of course is a situation that nearly everyone is going to be in.
Luckily I have a career and background in software and technology, so
I'm fortunate enough to make a pretty good living.

I also came to the realization that I was going to have to be a little
more proactive concerning my retirement, and take it a little more
seriously.  It's pretty clear that relying on social security benefits
once I reach retirement most definitely won't be enough to live
comfortably.  This means that I need to start saving and investing
more of my money on a regular basis.

I had read David Ramsey's book *Total Money Makeover* and that
triggered some of my new focus on thinking about money.  That book is
pretty radical on it's advice for getting ahold of your money, but
it's pretty much spot on for what you should be doing.  I'm not
following all of it and I've made a few mistakes such as taking out a
loan for my car and spending more then I should in general.

Despite not following Ramsey's advice in full, which would involve
paying off all of your debt before starting to invest, I feel more
comfortable putting money away even though I still have some debt.
Especially after playing around with the compound interest calculator.
You should play with one too to see how much money you could have
depending upon different market returns.

So with my new found interest in starting to handle my investing a
little more intelligently I decided to do some research.  My approach
before had been sign up for the 401k and pick a target retirement
mutual fund, but I wanted to understand a little bit more and try to
get an idea of what to expect.

So in typical fashion for myself I bought a few books.  I just
finished the first one, which is a little book by John Bogle, called
*The Little Book on Common Sense Investing*.

The book isn't that long and I finished reading it in a couple of
days.  I'm glad that I did.  It's exactly what it purports to be, a
little book with a lot of common sense backed up by some math.  It's
definitely not a get rich quick book or anything even close to that,
but I do feel that armed with the information from that book, while I
won't get rich, I may on average get better results following its
guidance than I would trying to just pick a good mutual fund.

Bogle, the author, is the founder of Vanguard, which is a well
respected company which offers investment services and funds to invest
in.  He is the inventor of the *Index Fund*, which is to a large
extent what the book is about.  An index fund, is a fund which
basically owns a large number of stocks, in porportion to their
capitalization in the market.  This in effect tracks the market as a
whole, instead of being more invested in a particular sector or group
of companies.

The book goes over what an index fund is, and how it compares to
typical mutual funds offered.  The big difference, and one that the
book makes very clear, is that over the long term, the stock market as
a whole has performed better percentage wise than nearly every mutual
fund.  Whether this is by a percent or two, or larger, when Bogle
gives the numbers, you can see that very few mutual funds actually
perform any better then the market as a whole, and that over more then
five years or so, they nearly all perform either worse then or close
to how an index fund would perform.

The central thesis of the book, in my opinion, is that the average
investor should invest in a low cost index fund as opposed to a mutual
fund.  Besides the fact that the index fund over time almost certainly
performs better than a typical mutual fund does, Bogle gives an even
more important reason to seriously look at an index fund.  That
reason, is cost.  Mutual funds, and in particular actively managed
mutual funds, typically have a higher annual cost then an index fund
does, sometimes as high as a one percent more.

This makes sense, given that an index fund simply aims to hold a
representation of the market as a whole for the long term, whereas a
mutual fund is more frequently trading and reallocating its holdings,
and therefore is more actively "managed".

This may not seem like a big deal, but it means that even if the
mutual fund was going to outperform the index fund, it would need to
do so by more than its annual cost, because otherwise that would eat
away at the gains anyway.

The book also teaches a bit more about stocks and tries to explain how
speculative behavior contributes to the price of stocks.  The core
message is that the most sane course of reasoning is to realize that
owning a stock gives you ownership in the company and it means that
you are entitled to dividends.  The intrinsic value of the market is
tied to GDP and corporate profits.  The speculative betting is what
drives a lot of the price changes, with active traders betting on
optimism or pessimism.

So I didn't explain that last part that well, but I have a few more
books to read.  The core thing to take away from the book is that the
typical investor in it for the long haul should be looking for very
low cost index funds which track the market as a whole.  A little bit
of time in the book is spent on the bond market as well, and here, the
message of the book is similiar in that you should look for an index
fund here as well.

The book also talks about the value of using different types of
financial advisors and investment professionals, which, if you're even
a little bit cynical, won't surprise you when it says these folks are
of dubious value.  That being said it does say that some investment
advisors can be helpful for other reasons, such as asset allocation
and navigating taxes.  For the most part the book is not all that
friendly to a lot of investment firms.  This book advocates for buying
and holding for a long time, whereas a lot of the finanical industries
profit is tied to people buying and trading frequently.

As this book makes abundantly clear and repeats throughout past
performance is not a gaurantee of future performance.  This book is
certainly a common sense guide to investing, and unfortunately, it
sounds like a lot of people don't have very much common sense.

It's a really good read.  It's totally about index funds and why you
should invest in them.  There isn't anything about evaluating
individual stocks or anything like that.  It's a simple forumula for
investing for the long haul.  If you don't know much about the market
this book is great, and will help you understand the mutual fund
industry much better.  A percent here and there over 30 or 40 years
makes a big difference, and there's a good chance the advice in this
book, if only to seriously look at the annual cost of your
investments, might earn you a percent more per year on your portfolio.

If a percent doesn't sound like a lot, you need to play with the
compound interest calculator.  Because it is.

Anyway, you should read this book.



