---
title: "Book Review - Deceit, Desire, and the Novel"
date: 2020-01-02T12:34:26-05:00
draft: true

---

Back in August I stumbled across a summary of Rene Girard's mimetic
theory online (via a link on Hacker News) and immediately became
interested in it.

Since then I've read a number of books by Girard, the first of which
was *I See Satan Fall Like Lightening.* This book had an impact on me,
not so much due to the fact that it has anything to do with
Christianity (which it does), but because it offers a new framework
for understanding violence.

But this review is about *Deceit, Desire, and the Novel,* another book
by Girard, which takes a look some key novels, and again performs an
analysis drawing on mimetic theory.  Girard reviews works by a number
of the masters of literature: Cervantes, Stendhal, Flaubert, Proust
and Dostoevsky.  Through the lens of mimetic theory, here termed
*triangular desire*, Girard offers up an analysis of these books which
is deeply thought provoking and relevant.

* expand and make this paragraph below mean something

Girards analysis of these author's work through the lens of
*triangular desire* offers a treasure trove of thought, and a
seemingly never ending source of interpretive power.  *Triangular
desire*, a model of sorts, or as Girard puts it, "a systematic metaphor,
systematically pursued," offers up at once something essentially
simple and powerful.

* and lead into this paragraph

The triangle of *triangular desire* is made up of the mediator (or
model), the subject, and the object.  Girard hypothosizes that humans
learn their desires through the imitation of their model.  In effect,
our desires come from another -- a mediator or model.  Thus in the
triangle of *triangular desire*, the subject's desires are mediated
via the model, and the object of the subject's desire is in effect
learned through the model.

* integrate the following paragrahs better

Girard is obviously a master at interpreting just about everything
through mimetic theory, or in this book *triangular desire*.  One of
the criticisms of mimetic theory is that it is in effect a theory of
everything.  Girard wields it the same way a physicist might discuss
the impact of gravity on all things.

The difference of course is that we can prove in a material sense the
effects and reality of gravity.  Gravity isn't open to interpretation,
the nature of desire, and with it, the essense of individuality and
free will, kind of are.

However, in an effort to keep this book review about the book at hand,
I'll simply gloss over the small issue of whether or not *triangular
desire*, or mimetic theory, is actually correct.  I will say however
that reading Rene Girard's analysis of literature and culture, and in
later works, religion, myth, and psychology, is super fun and
interesting.

Besides, if mimetic theory is actually the humanities equivalant of
gravity, eventually we'll have quantum mimetic theory, and then just
fuck it.

Keeping to this book and not falling into defending or attacking
mimetic theory, I'll say that maybe you should read it.

Maybe you should read it if you've ever been left wanting with regards
to the question of why we want what we want, and do what we do.  Does
it offer a mathematical proof to validate its veracity and
correctness?  No.  Does it however begin to offer a framework and
model which just maybe explains the course of events of life,
individually and collectively, in a way that actually seems to make
sense?  This is what it promises to do.  And in this book Girard
delivers on that promise, using his model.




* internal vs external mediation

* vanity and snobbism

* less obvious forms of triangular desire -

* metaphysical desire

* the double

* 

