---
title: "Book Review: I Am a Strange Loop"
date: 2020-02-06T06:50:55-05:00
draft: false
series: book-review
tags: [ "book-review" ]
description: "My review of I Am a Strange Loop by Douglass Hofstadter"
keywords: [ "Book-Review", "Strange Loop"]

---

*I Am a Strange Loop*, is a book by Douglas Hofstadter concerning the
nature of the self.  Published in 2007 it's a followup to his *Godel,
Escher, Bach,* and an attempt to drive home the central theme of that
book, which he feels was missed by and large.

In this work Hofstadter explores what he considers to be the
experience of the "I", or self, and how this experience is constructed
from a self-referential loop of sorts -- his *strange loop*.

Through the text Hofstadter uses any number of metaphors and "thought
experiments" to drive home his loop.  Or I think that this is what
he's doing.  Hofstadter's prose at times can be a little wordy but
overall he communicates his message well.

The one spot I felt Hofstadter drove home his message most effectively
was his exposition of Kurt Godel's work concerning *Principia
Mathematica.*  It's really pretty incredible what Godel did, which was
show that an entire system architected and designed by the geniuses of
the time to eliminate all self reference, was actually
self-referential through and through.

Hofstadter does a great job of explaining this, even for someone like
myself who hasn't really done math for a while.  It's pretty clever
how it works, and the story behind it.  It's these few chapters that
get me really excited about reading *Godel, Escher, Bach*.  For me,
these are hands down the best chapters of the book.

While *I Am a Strange Loop* has a lot of loopy stuff
in it, this is the work that Hofstadter bases his notions of the self
on, and builds his strange loop from.

Where the book falls apart for me is the rest of it though.  Not so
much that I don't think he may be right, but I feel like he bounces
around a lot and some of the metaphors are more effective than
others.  It seems to me that he kind of just throws some metaphors at
the reader, hoping they may stick, to kind of explain what he's trying
to say.

I can't really blame him for this though, but I do feel like the book
doesn't have the focus and effectiveness that it could.  There are a
few things I feel like he could have given more attention.  I would
have liked to have seen more about the causal potency of patterns he
describe.  Besides the experience of the self being analogous to the
self-referential *strange loop* he discovers with Godel's work,
Hofstadter, in my opinion dances around what drives the loop a little bit.

Later in the book, nearly at the end, he casually mentions the
"so-called problem of free will," like its no big thing when
discussing consciousness.  Here Hofstadter, in less than a few pages,
declares that we "have wants," and that our "wants" cause us to do
things.  He then declares that there is no sense to maintain that our
"wants" are free, or that our decisions are.  He then claims, they are
the outcomes of physical events in our heads.

To me the section in chapter 23, *There is no Free Will*, is an
example of why I feel the book fell apart in some places.  I
seriously have some issues with just declaring *free will* a sacred
cow, killing it, and then using the reasoning he uses in this section
like its some kind of "proof" that there is no such thing.  I mean, I
wouldn't to so far as to say that he is totally wrong, I just thing he
is missing tying some pieces together, that he lays out in the text.

The experience of the self, through the *strange loop*, so far as our
bodies experience feelings and emotions, is laid out through metaphor
and thought experiments.  What he is saying kind of boils down, in my
opinion, to the idea that if we had thought recorders, for instance,
each *input* that is processed by the mind is recorded, and then
played back, we *experience* this process.  As opposed to a computer
playing back these *inputs* -- a computer would have no feeling or
experience.

In Hofstadter lingo, *symbols* should be thought of as "a symbol
inside a cranium, just like a simmball in the hypothetical careenium,
should be thought of as a triggerable physical structure that
constitutes the brain's way of implementing a particular category or
concept."  So inputs, to the brain, trigger Hofstadter's *symbols*,
which does something physically, or whatever.

Honestly reading this book makes me feel like an idiot, but there is a
fair amount of writing in this book and enough metaphorical
construction (not enough fundamentals) that is put out there in such a
way that it feels like a lot of the *concepts* in it are built on a
shaky foundation.  Not that I'm doing anything in this post to refute
them, just saying this is what it feels like to me.  This book is
loopy enough to make me want a drink.

The book doesn't answer *who is the I* (it kind of tries to), rather I
think it explains how through the experience and construction of the
loop, we develop an abstraction known as "I," or the self.  I guess
what Hofstadter is saying, is that there is no true self -- instead
our experience constructs an abstraction which appears to us as this
through our experience of symbols of which we attach meaning to (the
derivation of what *meaning* is is left out of the book) and *feel.*

In Chapter 7, *The Epi Phenomenon*, page 97, Hofstadter says that the "I" is
the driver -- his words: "If I want something to happen, I just *will*
it to happen, and unless it is out of my control, it generally *does*
happen."  Sentences later while describing the "I", "How could it be
so all-powerful and yet not exist?"

In the next section is Hofstadter compares the bottom up and top down
viewpoints using his analogies and declares that it *seems* that the
bottom up is the more *fundamental.*  And this is the course the book
takes, and I suppose, it's from this viewpoint that towards the end he
kills the *sacred cow* of the so-called "free-will."

Our existence is reduced to biological determinism -- have a nice day
meat sack.  Based upon no less than a notion that the "bottom-up"
thinking *seems* more *fundamental,* Hofstadter builds the rest of the
book.  In a way he tries to build up meaning again through a creative
use of language to reduce the impact of the meat-sack reductionism he
espouses.  That's my hot-take anyway.  A harsher take might be to say
that pseudo-scientific thought tries to rebuild the meaning it has
killed by assigning new meaning to the meaning of the words it has
ingloriously killed off.

While the dictionary isn't written in stone, I think redefining the
word symbol, as Hofstadter does in this book, is a mistake, and adds
to the confusion I had reading it.  Symbol is a vague enough word, but
to give it the meaning this book does, is a little frustrating to me.

There are a lot of tangents that Hofstadter goes off on in the book,
and a lot of them are interesting, and could be fruitfully pursued
further.  But the question to me, in this context, is if that fruit
would be any good.  For a book of science, the only thing "proved" in
the book is Godel's work, showing a system designed to eliminate
self-reference was in fact, self-referential.  I suppose from an
empirical viewpoint, there could be some value in exploring some of
Hofstadter's concepts throughout the book.  Or they might just be
interesting to read about.

Hofstadter's *strange loop* however is described well, and almost
romantically in some places, as he seems to portray a secular notion
of spirituality built from the experience of individual "selves" which
exist in oneself, as well as others.  It's a nice way of kind of
laying out an idea of immortality and remembrance of people who have
passed, and Hofstadter describes this experience through his own
personal life, and the tragic loss of his wife.

While I believe that I agree with the core premise of the book, that
is, the *strange loop* is the experience of the self, I wasn't
really crazy about the book itself.  Which is disappointing, because I
am looking forward *still* to reading *Godel, Escher, Bach* by the
same author.

I didn't like the book mainly because of the writing style.  As much
as this book is about the *strange loop*, it's also about Hofstadter,
his opinions, and his life.  I mean, I am basically in agreement with
just about everything he says in the books.  But I lost interest
hearing what I think could be considered pseudo-scientific
rationalizations of certain aspects of spirituality.

Despite my criticisms of the work, and my reluctance to submit to the
viewpoint that all we are is sacks of meat and all of our behavior
will one day be reduced to a deterministic system which has been
derived from genetics and physics (Hofstadter does not put it so
bleakly, but it seems this is his position), I think it's a good book.

To be fair, Hofstadter does say in the beginning he doesn't believe
philosophical thought can be proved in the same way as mathematics.
I kind of have to agree with him here.  And he does lay out the course
of the work early on, in the dialog he made up between Socrates and
Plato when he was younger.  Is the self an illusion? And what is to be
made of free will?

Hofstadter gives his answer in this book I guess.  I'm not even sure
he's wrong anywhere, I'm just not sure he's right and I certainly
didn't find this to be convincing one way or the other.

Anyway, despite not being totally crazy about this book, or the style
of writing, I'm still really looking forward to *Godel, Escher, Bach.*
Hofstadter is a good writer, and he has a lot to say, even if I don't
totally agree with his viewpoint.  



