---
title: "Book Review: Violence and the Sacred"
date: 2021-05-01
draft: true
series: book-review
description: "A book review of Rene Girard's Violence and The Sacred"
tags: [book-review]
keywords: [book-review]
---

*Violence and The Sacred*, by Rene Girard, is probably the most
ambitious book that I have ever read.  Written by somebody with no
shortage of accolades, the book takes on the ultimate role of religion
and ritual in the world.  Through a comparative analysis of myth and
tragedy, Girard displays his theory on the founding mechanism of
culture.

Claiming to have found what Girard ultimately argues to be a
"universal" mechanism which reveals the common nature of ritual across
culture is quite a large claim.  To back it up, Girard takes the time
to demonstrate the inner workings of mimetic theory, here, more or
less called the "surrogate victim theory," and shows how it fully
illuminates the nature of ritual and sacrifice.  By applying his
theory to myth and tragedy Girard shows how his theory of the
surrogate victim reveals the hidden founding mechanism that leads to
ritual and the sacred.

Girard's theory is that an original murder committed by a community
saves the community from itself.  Through the murder of a scapegoat,
or, surrogate victim, the community experiences a catharsis of sorts,
freeing itself from the destructive reciprical violence which had
threatened its continued existence.

This "founding murder" is purported to be such a powerful event
because before this murder the community had been engulfed in a storm
of violence which threatened its very survival.  The murder's
cathartic character for the community resolves the crisis, restoring
peace and order.

Early in the book Girard shows that violence never goes unanswered,
and that the only thing that successfully answers violence is more
violence.  The natural growth of violence directed by members of the
community towards each other continues to grow and eventually there
are two potential outcomes. Either the violence ultimately destroys
the community it had enveloped, or, through the process of a unanimous
murder, an event which directs the reciprical violence towards a
scapegoat, the community is saved from destroying itself.  This
scapegoat bears all of the ills of the society, and being unable to
reciprocate, the escalation of violence goes into remission.

The founding murder is then repeated through ritualistic sacrifice, as
the community in question seeks to keep the "all against all" violence
that had threatened it previously at bay.  By attempting to recreate
the event, which the people attribute to saving them, the birth of
ritual and order is brought into the community.  And it is by this
process that the scapegoat becomes the sacred.  All at once, the
scapegoat has been identified as both the communities monster and also
its savior.  This duality, of being the source of all the community's
ills while also being the one who saved the community from destruction
makes the scapegoat, in effect, sacred.

This mechanism of the "founding murder" is claimed by Girard to be the
origin of ritual by which primitive people are able to cast out the
"impure" violence by the "pure" violence of sacrifice.  Girard goes so
far as to draw a line from this mechanism all the way to modern
society and it's current method of warding off violence -- the judiciary.

The theory is built up and demonstrated by an examination of myth,
tragedy, and ethnological studies which reveal the function of
sacrifice.  Girard draws heavily on Greek tragedy, both *Oedipus*, and
*The Bacchae*, in revealing the inner workings of the surrogate victim
and something he calls the "sacrifical crisis."  The most in depth
demonstration of the surrogate victim is taken from these plays,
however, Girard also relates the same mechanism to other cultures and
myths throughout the book. 

The Oedipus plays are used as the prime example in the text.  From
these plays, and also The Bacchae, Girard demonstrates how the poets
succeed in "demystifying" myth by revealing the symmetrical quality of
tragedy, and the nature of reciprical violence.  Girard develops and
displays what he calls the "sacrifical crisis," wherein the rituals no
longer function in warding off escalating violence, before then
displaying how a unanimous action of violence towards a surrogate
victim bring order back to the community.

After developing the core of his theory he contrasts it with modern
ideas.  It's in this comparison that Girard is able to show how the
theory of the surrogate victim is able to explain the origins of
culture more fully than other theories, such as Freud's Oedipus
Complex.

Two chapters in the book compare and contrast Freud's
theorizing with mimetic theory and mimetic desire.  Girard's theory,
mimetic theory, although not clearly called this in the book, draws
heavily on the concept of mimesis and desire.

Freud, according to Girard, however, stopped short at uncovering the
mimetic aspect of desire.  This leads to the rift in the theories.
Freud's object based desire, where the analysis is rooted in an
object, instead of a mediator, leads Girard to proclaim and identify
the shortcomings of Freud's Oedipus complex.

And again, in the next chapter where Girard discusses Freud's *Totem
and Taboo*, Girard again shows Freud being "almost right."  While in
his text Freud even talks about an original murder, he misses the
function of the surrogate victim.

The strongest portraly of the accuracy of Girard's mimetic theory, in
my opinion, is when he clearly portrays it's function in myth and
studies of primitive cultures which he brings into the book.

The jump Girard makes from the primitive culture's ritual to modern
society both being based upon the function of sacrifice is harder, at
least for me, to grasp.  However, this is the leap that Girard makes,
claiming also that the modern structures of society, such as the law
and institution, and more modern forms of ritual, all descend from the
same origins.  He does back this leap up with example and analysis,
but not as thoroughly as he does with primitive culture.  Tracing the
link through ritual in this book does not seem to be it's primary aim,
although with his comparisons of Frued and also kinship and marriage
structures, Girard makes it possible to continue in this vain.

The functional aspect of mimetic theory is that through the sacrifice
of a surrogate victim, the violence which threatens to engulf a
society is warded off.  By this mechanism, where society attempts to
shut down the reciprical nature of "bad" violence by "good" violence,
society is able maintain its social order.  The core function of
ritual sacrifice for primitive man is to control violence and maintain
order.

Modern society, of course, has other means to ward off reciprical
violence.  The judicial system gives society the means of preventing
retribution from spreading too far as it has a monopoly on the use of
violence.  Although for Girard the function of the judiciary is in
essence the same as sacrifice in a way, that is, by preventing
violence from growing, it is hard to clearly link the progression from
ritual sacrificee to the judiciary.  For me it is anyway.

However, Girard makes an excellent case throughout the book that modern
society itself is derived from the mechanism of the surrogate victim.
Later in the book he discusses the "unity of all rites" and shows how
the maintenance of social order, or, the necessity of difference
amongst people, is critical in the functioning of society.  This, to
modern society, according to Girard, is hard to grasp.  In modern
society it is more common to play down differences.  The modern person
is less likely to fear the unknown, or the similar, and Girard
attributes this to the judiciary and state power.  Modern society,
while nowhere near immune to violence, is less aware and fearful of it
than the primitive.



From the beginning of the book:

>> Because the victim is sacred, it is criminal to kill him -- but the
   victim is sacred only because he is to be killed.

Girard posits that myth and sacrfice must and indeed do stem from a
real original event -- a founding murder that saves the community from
the violence that engulfs it.  The community then seeks through
reproducing this event in the form of ritual sacrifice to ward off
"impure" violence -- a violence which in the eyes of the community
comes from outside it.  Through sacrifice the community seeks to
appease the gods.

Girard shows that a primary concern of primitive man is violence, and
how to prevent it from spreading.  He calls out the fact that
violence, once stirred up, must find an outlet.  Even if the outlet
isn't in fact the original source that instigated it.  Through this,
the surrogate victim mechanism is discovered, the founding murder is
commited, and the ritual of sacrifice is born.

Violence is the only mechanism which can end violence.

Sacrifice and ritual become the communities methodology to ward off
violence, to keep it at bay, so that the community can endure.








