---
title: "Compiler Time"
date: 2018-08-26T10:16:27-04:00
draft: false
tags: [
      "musings",
      "interpreter",
      "compiler"
]
---

Well I've found another distraction from SICP which I'm going to pick
up after I finish the exercises in chapter 2, but I've already started
reading it a little bit.  Thorsten Ball has released his sequel to
*Writing an Interpreter in Go,* entitled *Writing a Compiler in Go*
and I'm excited to get my hands on it.  His first book was great, and
made writing an interpreter fun and easy.  I'm looking forward to
building the stack based VM and compiler and hacking away at that.

Last time I translated the code from Golang to C# so I'd have to think
a little bit while following along (I still have to do hashes and
arrays) and it worked great.

I'm also excited to dig through some of his Golang code again.  After
writing the assembler for Nand2Tetris in Golang and then some simple
test code I was working on, I'm finding I like Golang more and more.
I've been using the Goland IDE from JetBrains since I got it for free
from their open source licensing program.  Since I've kind of
discontinued the Bagombo project I'll have to start a new open source
project to renew the license in December.  Maybe I'll put together a
simple language and compiler after working through this book.

After finishing part one of Nand2Tetris and building the computer and
assembler I'm even more excited to work through Ball's compiler book.
A year ago before I started this I'd been interested in programming
languages and compilers and how they worked, and after working through
Nand2Tetris and Ball's first book, they are much more approachable.

Back in April I came up with a "learning plan" which has changed a
little bit and become more detailed.

It spread out from a one year plan which was far to compressed to a
general four to five year outline I've put together, and while I'm
only a few months into it I'm happy with my progress so far.  While
SICP is kind of the over-arching book to get through in this first
year, I've still had enough time for my detours such as this book and
Nand2Tetris.

The next part I'm adding in is the Discrete Math specialization on
Coursera.  While learning about parsing and how compilers work has
been fun, there is a whole other side to learning about more advanced
languages such as Haskell and ML and type systems.  Past C# and Golang
there are a number of interesting languages.

My goal is to understand enough of the math notation and theory to be
able to work through the book *Types and Programming Languages* in the
next year or two.  I'm also becoming enamored with Scheme and very
interested in learning Clojure after finishing SICP.

So anyway, after hacking through chapter two of SICP which I'm almost
done with I'll be hacking away at the Monkey compiler detailed in
Ball's new book.

I also have a few more blog posts to write this month.  So far I've
kept up with writing a post or so a week.  I'd like to write more
technical posts and code walkthroughs sooner rather then later.  



