---
title: "Getting Motivated Again"
date: 2018-10-09T20:50:40-04:00
draft: false
series: personal
tags: [
      "SICP",
      "musings",
      "netflix"
]      
---

Well after taking it easy on SICP for the month of September to read
WACIG, it's been a little tough to get motivated to return to SICP.
But I'm not giving up yet.  I'm determined not to become one of the
next people on the internet to have a blog and declare they are going
to work through SICP and then stop before the end of it.  It may take
me well over a year to make it through, but I am going to.

A few months ago I looked at my Netflix watching habit with the goal
of significantly cutting back on my mindless video watching.  So far,
I've basically failed spectacularly in cutting back on that.  For a
while, I did better by putting music without lyrics on while I did
other work.  But that short lived exercies ultimately led back to
video watching, with the discovery of Plex and a friends movie
library.

I'm watching Stargate currently as I write this post.

So I need to find some motivation and energy to get moving again on
SICP.  Part of my problem is that the amount of things to learn can
sometimes feel overwhelming in the tech space.  SICP, without a doubt,
is not about the Scheme programming language, and I'm sure that the
long term benefits of reading about programming as it teaches it won't
be lost in the future.  It isn't a book about algorithms, or object
oriented programming, or just functional programming.  It's really
about the structure and interpretation of computer programs.  It is a
long book to really work through.

Working through it has kept me focused and has definitely helped me
stop buying so many technical books on Amazon.  It's also spoiled me
somewhat in what to expect of other programming books.

So overall I've been pretty happy with my focus to work throught it so
far.  Last week I made the decision to work through *The Little
Schemer* before picking up in chapter 3 of SICP, but I'm starting to
waffle on that.

I also noticed I hadn't kept up with my blogging, so I figured I would
write one of these reflective posts to get my thoughts organized and
try to find the will to get moving again.

So here, in this post, on the public internet, on my unread blog, I'm
recommitting to finish SICP and start working on chapter 3 within the
next few days.

I may or may not finish *The Little Schemer* first, but if I do, it
needs to be within the next few weeks to not hold up the SICP work too
much.  With the recursion in *The Little Schemer* and SICP I think
pretty soon it will be impossible to not reason in recursion first, as
the more you see it the more it lends itself to some elegant ways to
solve problems.

So now that I've committed to SICP again, I'm going to pointlessly
explore what I'm going to learn a little in parallel with SICP and
after.  I'm always torn with what to learn on my own.  Previously it
had been work related or focused on things that would help finding new
jobs.  But now it's a little more driven by what's interesting to me,
and that's still learning about and implementing some programming
languages.  SICP aligns well with this goal, especially the last two
chapters which I will finish!

So in that effort, and to better understand some of the more advanced
work in that area, I need to up my discrete math skills.  So despite
the cost I'm going to sign up for the Coursera course on discrete
math.  It's about 79 dollars a month, but it looks promising and will
keep me focused on it.  I believe this will help me work through the
book *Types and Programming Languages*.

However, I do feel that I should orient some of my learning to things
that are career related, and that includees some "trendy" things.
There are a lot of them out there.

So I picked up the book *Learning Python* which is a massive tome on
Python.  I'm also going to plan on upping my JavaScript skills big
time and learning React.  I've toyed around with Angular a little bit,
but I figure I'll switch it up a little.  So soon I'm going to be
picky some semi-meaty side projects to work on using this stuff.  I
have some web-scraping project ideas that I can build.  Also, a lof of
the AWS Lambda demo stuff is in Python, so I can build up some
"serverless" skills too.

Anyway, these things correlate fairly closely to what I had penned out
in my learning plan after looking at it again.  Once I finish the
Discrete Math I'll hopefully be into chapter 4 of SICP, so I'll be in
a better position to read *Types and Programming Languages*, and I'll
also be in a better spot to studying algorithms in depth again.

So my trendy things to learn will be Python, more JavaScript and
React, Docker, and a NoSQL database like MongoDB.  For the core stuff
I'll keep going on SICP and math, aiming to get up to *Types And
Programming Languages* sooner rather than later.

Oh I also still need to cut back on the "Netflix" watching.  Season 2
of the Ozarks is pretty good so far...

