---
title: "Learning Python, Part 1"
date: 2018-10-21T14:51:12-04:00
draft: false
series: personal
tags: [
      "python",
      "programming"
]
description: "Starting to learn Python..."

---

It's been a little while since I've started to learn a new programming
language.  Since I started down the path of studying how interpreters
and compilers are developed, my interest in languages has grown quite
a bit.  So I decided that I would take the time to really learn a new
language while I'm also working through SICP, and I decided that the
language to learn would be Python.

This decision was come to from a practical standpoint more then
anything else.  Python is a language which has been around for a long
time, has a ton of libraries and tools available for it, and is widely
used in industry.  Part of me wanted to not learn it and dive into
something like Clojure or Haskell, however, since I'm already learning
Scheme I decided to hold off on Clojure for the time being.
Practically, there are more Python jobs than Clojure jobs, and there
is a lot of literature on Python.

Python is also regarded as a relatively easy language to learn.  It is
dynamically typed and garbage collected, with an intuitive and easy
syntax.  It's also easy to get running on your computer, and with VS
Code there is a free good IDE for starting with development.  Python
is also widely used for mathematics and machine learning tasks, which
I'd like to eventually play around with a bit.  With a library like
SymPy, it's possible to do symbolic math which will help me work
through a lot of the math I need a refresher on.  In conjuction with
something like [Jupyter](http://jupyter.org) I can write up problems
and easily have good looking math equations which I can reference in
blog posts.

So far I'm not that long down the the path of learning Python.  I've
started reading the massive tome "Learning Python" by Mark Lutz, and
I'm a few hundred pages in.  This book is massive at around 1500 pages
and covers Python in depth.  I've probably got another 200 pages or
so to work through before it even starts exploring statements and
loops, and even further before it gets to functions.  From there it
goes into classes and object oriented programming, and covers modules
and a lot of other topics in the Python spectrum.  In all it looks to
cover all things about the Python language itself.

Despite the length of this book I expect it will take much less time
to work through than SICP.  There's nothing really hard about it, it
just goes into a lot of detail which I think is a good thing.  I
probably could have picked up a shorter book or even just hacked away
at some Python programs, but I prefer having something structured
which will explain the nuances of the language.

My impression with Python so far is a good one.  I have a few ideas
for web scapers that I'm going to write as some programs to get
started with.  While Python has a large set of builtin types such as
dictionaries and lists, I'm also going to take the time to implement a
lot of core data structures and algorithms manually in Python as a
learning project.  I have a number of books on Algorithms that I've
collected now, so once I get a good handle on the language I'll spend
some time with that.

All in all, Python is a language that is definitely worth learning.
It's support for cross-platform development is very strong which is a
big benefit -- it's possible to do cross-platform GUI development
which is something you don't get with a lot of languages.

