---
title: "Learning Python, Part 2"
date: 2018-12-16T12:42:27-05:00
draft: false
series: personal
tags: [
      "python",
      "programming"
]

---

My progress slowly continues on my path to learning Python.  To help
me in this task, I purchased a few books, the first of which I'm
working through (slowly) now.  That book, *Learning Python*, by Mark
Lutz, is a massive tome on the Python language proper.  By massive tome
I mean about 1500 pages of text covering versions 2.x and 3.x of
Python.  It starts off with the basics and goes into more advanced
topics, and, as far as I can tell, covers all aspects of the language
itself.  Lutz has another book, *Programming Python*, another massive
tome which I also bought, that covers the libraries and application
programming.

Now, of course after starting to learn Python (and liking the
language), I'm already questioning if I should have went with learning
Ruby instead (Rails?) but I'm trying to keep that out of my mind for
now.  I'm trying to keep a healthy balance of learning topics out of a
purely career based interest while allowing time for personal
interests to also take hold.  Fortunately fo me, these interests
frequently overlap, and learning Python was a little bit driven by
both.  That's part of the reason why I started thinking about Ruby and
Rails, but anyway, I can always learn Python and then Ruby if I really
want.

While I've only written a hundred lines of Python and played around in
the REPL to get a feel for different aspects of the language my
initial impressions are positive.  Python strikes me as a simple
language to get started with that has a lot of power at the same
time.  Comprehensions, generators, strong functional programming
aspects, and a solid group of builtin types make it possible to get a
lot done in short order, making it a strong scripting language.  The
fact that there are numerous libraries and frameworks available
for use with Python make it easy to see that learning Python is a
pretty good investment in time regardless.

Working through the book it's clear that while Python is an "easy"
language to learn, it has enough nauance and power to trip up
beginners, as any language would.  The book *Learning Python* covers both 2.x and
3.x, and there are a few differences between the two such as how
certain functions and iterables work which I'm sure will result in
future googling and visits to StackOverflow.  That said, being
familiar with garbage collected languages and mutable data structures
makes many aspects of Python familiar.  I personally am warming up to
the lack of curly braces and semicolons.  Python's insistence
on using indentation for indicating code blocks is different from say
Go or C#, it doesn't appear to hurt the readability of code in
general.

So far I haven't used Python enough to get familiar with its warts.
From browsing the web it looks like there may be some pain around
packaging and distributing modules, but, this certainly isn't unique
to Python.  Given that Python is interpreted it would certainly make
sense not to use it in some performance critical application domains,
but for hobby projects and scripting it has much to offer.  Python has
a great set of mathematics and machine learning libraries which I'd
like to approach in the future.  I still need to get around to that
discrete math course on Coursera..

Anyway, the more I play with Python that happier I am with picking it
as a language to learn.  I'm slightly regretting picking up such a big
book as a guide to the language, as I think I've been spoiled by the
density of information in SICP and the brevity of Scheme.  That said,
*Learning Python* is a great reference if it is on the long side.  

