---
title: "My Netflix Habit"
date: 2018-07-04T11:39:38-04:00
draft: false
series: personal
tags: [
      "netflix",
      "musings"
]
---

I have a few habits that I have trouble controlling.  Some of them are
probably net good (although expensive), such as buying books on
Amazon.  Some of them however are most definitely bad, such as my
habit of using the Juul e-cigeratte (although this is arguably better
then my use of regular cigerattes before).

My most pronounced habit is Netflix though.  Between having Netflix on
one monitor, and mindlessly surfing the internet and checking Twitter
on the other monitor, I waste countless hours.  I have it on right now
as I'm writing this blog entry. Star Trek Voyager barely grabs my
attention despite my love of *nearly* all things trek.  That's a topic
I won't get into here (it's not terrible).

I'm pretty sure I'm addicted to Netflix and surfing the internet.  Or
if its not an addiction, it's a habit.  And then I have my book buying
"habit" which may or may not be a good thing.  I've bought a lot of
books and I barely have time to even get to all of them.  Which is
crazy since outside of work I have very few responsibilities.
However, instead of working through the books that I habitually buy
(I'm getting better at working through them), I reflexively watch
Netflix and surf the internet.

I'm beginning to question why I do this so much.

The internet is supposed to be a marvellous technology which
enriches our lives.  I was in middle school when AOL and dial-up
internet started to be used, but I started using computers a few years
before.  Back then there was no Netflix and Twitter.  There wasn't as
much free software available to the average person, and I even paid
for Visual C++ and the like at local computer shows to learn how to
program once QBasic was a little too basic.

I wrote HTML and JavaScript just long enough to learn that developing
for the web was basically painful.  At first the internet (as I
remember it) was basically text-filled pages with some images and
people using flashing "updated" gifs whenever their sites changed.  It
wasn't really pretty, but it was fun.

I won't argue that the internet isn't great -- it is.  Besides the
"web" part of the internet, the underlying network enables
communication and networking amongst businesses and organizations like
never before.  I'm fairly sure that even working as a software
engineer and having been in IT for over ten years, I probably can't
name 5% of all the interesting things that the interent has enabled.

As the internet as grown, and home connection speeds have increased
and broadband is taken for granted in most places, the "web" part of
the internet has been transformed tremendously from what it was.

For me, it's grown into the greatest attention grabbing time sink
ever.

As I write this post, I'm sitting at the most powerful computer I've
ever owned, which I spent 2500 dollars on.  Instead of using it to its
full potential -- to say -- play a good computer game (which is a far
better use of time then watching Netflix), I'm watching Netflix!!  I
have countless browser tabs open which I can't even keep track of.

So besides the fact that I could be doing this on a less expensive
machine, is this even a problem?  Maybe I should just go with the flow
and relax.

I don't think so.

I barely even know why I watch so much Netflix and waste time on
Twitter at all anymore.

I'll start with Twitter.

I signed up for Twitter about seven or eight years ago to follow the
news.  And by news I mean following actual news sources and using it
as a content aggregator.  Not news as in some random Twitter user
reports something.

Twitter used to be TEXT!!!  Short spurts of information that I could
look at and click on a link to read an article.  Now, everything is an
image.  And if it's just text, it's practically useless.  Twitter for
all intents and purposes is an exercise in people being clever amongst
strangers.  Some stuff actually is funny, but on the whole, its
nonsense.

With the introduction of the use of emoji in everything, Twitter is
basically an assualt on your senses and emotions for the most part.

But it's addicting.  Need to waste some time?  I check Twitter.  There
is at this point a 1 in 25 chance I'll see something valueable.  It
used to be higher.  I know, I could redo my feed so I see other stuff.
I did this already when I unfollowed any politicians on my list (for
some reason I thought they might tweet something worthwhile).  Twitter
sans politics in my opinion is way better then Twitter with politics.
Unfortunately this is basically impossible.

So maybe it's not that bad to spend 30-45 minutes a day (this may be a
conservative estimate) wasting time on Twitter.  I don't know.

But I think it is.  I'd estimate that for every hour I was browsing
Twitter, well -- it's just an hour shot down the tubes.  Maybe Twitter
was designed purely as a distraction that you can browse while you
stand in line waiting for coffee on your phone.  It's probably good
for that.  Except for the fact that with all of the memes and vidoes
stuffed into your feed it's actually possible to go through gigabytes
of data using Twitter.  This from a service that used to be limited to 127
characters of text.

So if I don't mind limiting my Twitter use to when I'm waiting in line
for coffee maybe its worthwhile.  I can't think of a more productive
use of my time while I'm waiting for coffee.

But why even look at it?  I guess at this point it's a habit.  It's an
easy way to get some stimulation.  It's a distraction generator.

Which brings me to Netflix (and streaming video in general).

Netflix is amazing.  I won't lie.  Of all of the garbage that is on
the internet, Netflix in my opinion is terrific.

There is a lot of great stuff on Netflix and more all the time.  My
only problem is that I watch it too much.  I've let its convenience
get out of hand to the point where I have it on all the time, and
don't even give the shows the attention they deserve.

My problem with Netflix is my own self control.  I don't want to cut
watching any television (if that's a good term for it) out
completely.  House of Cards, The Ozarks, Breaking Bad, and other great
shows I've only watched because I was able to watch them on Netflix.
I don't even watch them once, many, I've watched two or three times.
Star Trek?  I've seen it so many times it's embarrassing.

So my only question with Netflix is why do I habitually put it on all
the time?  Even when I'm trying to do something like programming or
reading I feel like I have to have it on.  There's no question in my
mind that when I do this my attention is on neither and the results
suffer.

My suspicision is that I do it as a distraction.  I'm not sure why.
It's such a habit to have it on that I just do it.  Sitting down at
the computer?  Put Netflix on.  Not at the computer?  Put it on the
Apple TV.  It's always on.

Suspiciously, Netflix apparently doesn't have an easy way to discover
the total number of hours you spent watching it.  I bet I watch it at
minimum four hours a day on average.  So some quick math reveals that
four hours a day, at 365 days a year, for I'd guess eight years, means
I've spent -- 11,860 hours watching Netflix.  That seems insane but I
actually think that is possible.  Some of it may be distrubuted
amongst other services.

There are 8760 hours in a year.  That means I've spent over a year
streaming video.

That's insanse.  Advertisers must hate Netflix.  At least they can't
get to me there (Hint hint NYT and WSJ, I pay for your stuff and you
still pummel me with ads).

So even if I assume that my Twitter checking and Netflix watching
occurs in parallel, I've spent over a year full of time in a
distracted, stimulation seeking state.  Over 11,000 hours of just
being distracted.

When I think about that 10,000 hour rule to master something those
11,000 hours make me cringe a little.

I'm a decent programmer, what could I have built if I spent even 1/3
of those 11,000 hours actually building something?  A business?  What
if I spent 11,000 hours figuring out how to start a business and make
some money so that I could retire earlier?

Yes, for me, there is a problem.

I won't even get into imagining how big a problem it is on a larger
scale.

So my Netflix habit has taken of a year of my life.  Probably over a
half of it isn't even spent watching new material.

So it's time to cut back.  It's time to limit my Netflix watching.

It's time to do more reading (fiction and non-fiction) and programming
and writing.  It's time to do more producing rather then consuming.

Eight years from now, I'd rather look back and say I spent 11,680
hours of my time working on mastering skills I can use and appreciate
than being perpetually distracted by Netflix and Twitter.

So it's time to limit Twitter to standing in line for coffee.  It's
time to cut back drastically on Netflix.  I don't know what a good
amount is.  Maybe I'll try to only watch it with other people.  At
least cut it back to an hour a day.

Anyway, when I read this in 8 years, hopefully the accounting of over
11,000 hours sums up a little differently.










