---
title: "On Blogging"
date: 2018-06-14T19:34:59-04:00
draft: false
tags: [
      "blogging",
      "musings"
]
---


Is writing a blog worth it?  I guess I've decided to some extent that
it is.  The cost of hosting a blog is pretty low (1-2 dollars a month
for this one on AWS) and while chances are that this will become another
unvisited destination on the interent, there are still reasons to do it.

Besides improving my writing by blogging, blogging can provide other
benefits (like learning how to use emacs as I write an entry).  It can
also potentially be hazardous -- it's certainly not anonymous and if I
write something my employeer finds and doesn't agree with, it can
potentially have consequences.  Despite the potential drawbacks I
believe the potential benefits outweigh them by quite a bit.

Maybe you've stumbled on this entry thinking about writing your own
blog.  You've heard that it will help your career or provide untold
riches.  I can't say whether it will or it won't.  I do know that an
article I wrote on Code Project did help me get a job indirectly.  So
it's certainly possible that if you write something well and it's
helpful to others, it can pay dividends in some way.  I also got a
Code Project coffee mug from it, so there's that.  

I've read countless blogs and articles where people have talked about
having improved their careers and finances by blogging.  They also
tend to say that it takes time and effort and consistency.  Many of
them (sorry no links) say it takes years before finding success doing
this.  I don't really expect to blog to find financial success,
although it's certainly nice to think that it could provide a little
income.

Most of those people who have "successful" blogs also said they wrote
for years before finding any audience or success (hello internet and
the 4-5 random readers a weak).  I'm sure it also takes a little bit
of luck and planning.  Part of it is having a niche to write about.
Unless somehow I become an entertaining and insightful blog about
trendy topics (which I don't plan on), that means a little bit of
focus on what I write about.

I don't think that I'm focused enough to attract a readership about a
given topic (yet).  Given the fact that my personal programming
projects are about to revolve around Scheme, Standard ML, and writing
interpreters for the next year or so, my blog entries will probably be
about those topics.  I don't think this topic is going to draw as big
a following as blogging about the latest JavaScript library on
npm, or writing about ASP.NET, or some other framework that people use
at work, but it's what I'm interested in now.

So if you have stumbled on this blog then I certainly have some pity
for you and chances are at this point you'll simply increase my bounce
rate on Google Analytics.

If however you're interested in learning a little bit about
Scheme/Lisp and Standard ML while I stumble my way through them, you
might be in the right spot.  As of now I know that Scheme has a lot
of parenthesis and I can't use Visual Studio with it.  As for Standard
ML I know basically even less, except that it's been around for a
while and probably won't help me at work.

I am looking forward to learning these languages though.  I use C#
primarily and while it makes some functional programming possible, it
is primarily an imperative object oriented language.  So it will be
nice to practice in a different paradigm.

While this is a blog entry on blogging (sorry no tips today) I
think it would be prudent to say a little bit about what I hope this
blog may eventually become and what I want to get out of it.

The first goal is for this blog to be well written.  I want to be a
good writer and this is my primary tool for improving.  I've read a
lot of technical writing and programming books and writing clearly and
effectively about technology can be hard to do.  Tailoring the writing
to a specific skill level and knowing my audience will be critically
important.  If I want this to be a useful blog that generates traffic,
eventually I'll have to have a target audience and I'll have to write
well.

The second goal for this blog is for it to be good.  That sounds like
a pretty abstract goal and it is.  The last thing that I want this
blog to be is a catalog of ideas and paths I started down and never
finished.  I get distracted easily by new and shiny things, and
it would be all too easy to write a weekly commentary about what
happened on Twitter or in the technology world.  It's easy to get
caught up in this stuff and take off in a lot of different
directions.  I'd like for the entries to have value beyond a day or
two.  I don't want it to be a spot for commentary on the latest drama
in the world or technology industry.  There are plenty of avenues for
this already.

Goal number three will be for this blog to have a unique voice.  While
I improve my writing I'll have to develop a voice for communicating
using this medium.  I don't want it to read like a textbook or a
series of press releases for technology that I'm interested in or
like.  I'd like for it to be readable and not just put people to
sleep.

The fourth goal is for the blog to be useful.  Each entry should
provide value to the reader.  In theory this could be a lot of
different things.  It could be an entertaining entry, or a book
review, or a description of how to do something in C#.  While the
motiviations for having a blog can be selfish, for it to be useful it
needs to give some valeu to its readers.  Ideally this will be a blog
that people bookmark or subscribe to the RSS feed.  Eventually it
would be nice to have some readers and if the blog isn't useful it
won't.

As fifth goal, I would like for this blog to be somewhat fun
to do.  The technology of Hugo and AWS behind it, with a little
scripting, have made it trivial to manage.  I'd like for the writing
part to be interesting and fun so that it doesn't just become a
painful task.  So far I do find that I like writing the entries, and
if some people start to find it on the web, I think I'll be more
motivated to continue.

Finally, as a sixth goal, I'd like this blog to provide some return
value.  Besides just improving my writing, eventually I'd like to have
some readers on this site.  This in turn can provide a base for future
projects such as a book where I would be able to make a little money.
I'm not sure what to write a book on yet, but I'm leaning towards a
starting programming book with F#.  I don't know F# yet and have some
other projects to work on before this, but it sounds like a fun topic.










