---
title: "SICP Update 11-2018"
date: 2018-11-18T15:11:27-05:00
draft: false
tags: [
      "SICP",
      "musings"
]       
---

My continuing journey to finishing SICP has slowed to a crawl the last
month or so.  I made it through most of section 3.3 in October before
slowing down for some travel and rest.  It's definitely a meaty book
to work through, especially doing all of the exercises.

That being said I do continue to plan on finishing it, and hope to
finish reading the third chapter in the next few days or so and then
doing the problems within the next few months.  I still think I can
finish the book off within the original timeframe I had set, although
with the slow progress over the last few months it may prove to be a
little longer.

I've also slowed down on my blogging and keeping this up to date, and
with the holidays coming up it most likely won't pick up again till
sometime in January of the new year.

The past few months and the break from the original momentum I had are
an example of how hard it can be to get back into something when I
slow down.

Normally I overwhelm myself with new things to learn which revolve
around the tech world, but I'm marginally slowing down on this.  My
newly self-imposed Amazon budget is keeping me from induging on every
whim I have as far as learning new things is concerned.  This is
basically good because a lot of the books I buy I never get totally
around to reading in full.

I'm slowly learning Python at the same time and plan on continuing to
do this in parallel with SICP.  Python, like Scheme, is an elegant
language and with the plethora of applications and libraries available
for Python it's exciting to get started with it.



