---
title: "SICP Update 9-8-2018"
date: 2018-09-08T15:12:20-04:00
draft: false
series: personal
tags: [
      "SICP",
      "musings"
]      
---

I started working through SICP back in the middle of June, and now, in
the beginning of September, I've finished the first two chapters.
This includes doing around 90% of the problems or so, and I'm leaving
the last exercises of chapter 2 to the future to write the symbolic
algebra part.

If you're on the fence about working through SICP I can say that after
the first two chapters it's definitely worthwhile.  If you're not a
pro at recursion, working through this book will help immeasurabely.
Without the familiar looping constructs found in imperative languages,
using Scheme will force you to get comfortable thinking recursively.

Chapter 2 is about 140 pages long and contains just short of 100
problems to do.  It works through a few data structures such as sets
and binary trees and shows how to abstact operations on them.  It
covers a number of forms of abstraction in Scheme that you can use in
creating abstractions to represent different types.  Then it shows how
to create generic operations that work with different types.  This is
done through the example of a numerical package which allows programs
to use different types of numbers and perform operations on them.

It took me a few months to work through the second chapter.  I slowed
down a little from my pace of working through chapter one.  Counting
the exercises I skipped I probably averaged about 1 or 2 problems a
day.  Some of the exercises are fairly tough in this chapter.  While
there are solutions online, some of the exercises are big enough and
depend upon previous answers where its harder to check your work
because there are multiple ways of going about the problems.  That
said, it's definitely worth doing the problems.

Anyway, working further through the book, and cross referencing my
work with other solutions online, it looks like there are a number of
people who started SICP and don't finish.  I'm hoping that I don't add
to that number.  I think my goal of working through it with regards to
building the interpreter and compiler in the later chapters will keep
me motivated.

I am going to take a break for the next month or so (possibly less)
now to work through the new book by Thorsten Ball *Writing a Compiler
in Go* and translate that to C#.  It's also time to start the Discrete
Math Specialization on Coursera.  I also have to write the third post
in the series on flatmap...

