---
title: "SICP Update 7-19-2018"
date: 2018-07-19T20:51:38-04:00
draft: false
series: personal
tags: [
      "SICP"
]
---

I started working through Structure and Interpretation of Computer
Programs about a month ago, and I've made fairly steady progress so
far.  After a month, I've done most of the exercises up to 2.23, which
all told is about 43 problems.  Some of them have been more
challenging then others, and with the exception of one section in
chapter 2 which was listed as extra, I've basically done all of them.

Chapter 2 has many more exercises than chapter 1 did, with somewhere
in the neighborhood of 90 problems to work on.

Given my progress so far, I think that it may take anywhere from one
to two months on average to complete a chapter.  So most likely SICP
is going to take near a year to complete, however the further I get
along in the book the more convinced I am that this is a worthy
process to continue with.

During the month I've been working on SICP I've also read three other
non-technical books, completed 2 units of the Nand2Tetris course on
Coursera, and started to play with WPF ever so slightly.  This of
course while taking care of normal daily things such as watching too
much Netflix, going to work, and sleeping.  I'm still fighting with
waking up earlier, but I'm set on having a few hours in the morning to
do extra work.  That is proving to be a difficult nut to crack though,
so at least I've still been working through SICP at night.

It's also been fun to learn Scheme, and I've learned a little bit more
about Dr. Racket and figured out how to debug programs in it.
Searching for missing parenthesis isn't too terrible in Dr. Racket
since the GUI shows you which parenthesis match up by highlighting the
relevant sections of the code.  My skills with recursion are
definitely getting better, given Scheme has no iterative looping
constructs such as for and while.

Scheme is an interesting language to work with, and the practice of
writing programs without using mutable variables and depending upon
recursive procedures has been useful.  I'm really looking forward to
getting up to chapter 4 and 5 in SICP and working on the interpreter
and compiler presented.  

All told I'm pleased with my continued progress through SICP and look
forward to a year or so from now when hopefully I'll be done working
through it.  I'm going to try to blog more about a few of the problems
here and there as well.  I have an idea for a post which may be
worthwhile discussing how lists are represented in Scheme.



