---
title: "Tsundoku, Distraction, and Focus"
date: 2019-08-04T18:18:47-04:00
draft: false
series: personal
keywords: [ "tsundoku", "books", "words", "habit", "focus" ]
tags: [ "Book-Review" ]
description: "This is the post where I detail my habit of buying more
books than I'll ever have time to read, known in Japanese as 'tsundoku.'"
---


I already know that I buy more books than I'll probably ever have time
to read, and apparently, there is a word for it.  That word, tsundoku,
basically means buying too many books.  I didn't need any proof that
I'm an ardent practioner of tsundoku, but I was bored and decided to
look over my Amazon purchases -- for as long back as they would allow.

The results of this review, which (thankfully) only went back to 2013,
showed that I bought way too many books.  I'm almost embarrassed to
mention the number, but I basically could have bought a reasonable
used car for what I've spent on books.  They are, as you can imagine,
stacked piles high in my apartment.

In a month I'll be moving into my girlfriends house, and many of these
books will have to go in the basement.  Considering that these books,
besides some furniture, and my computers, amount to basically all I
own, I figured I should make a list of them.  The grand total (of the
ones I tracked via Amazon orders) was about 363 books.  This doesn't
even count digital purchases.

So yes, I have a book buying problem.  Yes, it is very expensive, and
yes -- there is a library within walking distance (a real library, not
the joke library that is my living room).

But I have something ingrained in me that makes me buy books.  More
than I can read for sure.

I added it up actually.  I figure I've read about 70 of the 363 books
that I've bought.  Which to be fair is a pretty good number of books
to have read, and if I add in the digital ones, it's even higher than
that.  So that means on average, I have about a 19% chance of reading
any book that I purchase.

My typical process is get excited by a topic or author, and then
proceed to buy everything I can about it.  Rarely am I content to
start with one and plan on buying more later.  Nope, it's buy anything
that looks promising about the given subject.

There was a time six or seven months ago when I "managed" my book
buying addiction on Amazon.  This lasted for around two months and
then I forgot that plan.

Upon making my list there unfortunately are books which I at this
point regret purchasing.  But overall most of them I still like and
would like to read.

So I'm a pretty good practicioner of tsundoku.  If I have mastered
anything, this may be it.

But it's time to recognize a wee little bit of a problem and the
actual monetary expense that it is.  I'll set an arbitrary book
buying limit of not buying any more books for 2019, and only buying 20
books in 2020.  I'll go one further, and limit myself to only five
books related to technology and business in 2020.  I'm overloaded
here.

Of course with this limit I'm already thinking of making my 2020
list...

Now one of my other issues, besides tsundoku, but something that I believe
partially drives my tsundoku, is the issue of distraction.

Being distracted is a state of being which it is easy to fall into
currently.  In fact, I read a book about it, 'Deep Work', by Cal
Newport.  It was a bit of a pop lifestyle book, but it was an easy
read and contained quite a bit of truth.

Now, in case you have just awoken from a 20-30 year coma and this is
the first thing you read on the interent, let me give you some advice
that I need to practice myself (Actually never take advice from the
internet in general including this).

The internet is a powerful tool, and the world wide web, built on the
internet is a source of good and bad.  There is a lot of good stuff on
the web.  The problem is most of the web is hype drive nonsense
designed to grab your attention and shovel advertisments in your face
to get you to buy something.

In fact, many of the world's great minds are busy at work, as you read
this, not practicing medicine, or curing cancer, but figuring out how
to track and study you so that they can craft more effective
advertisements.  The other great minds are figuring out how to build
fast distributed systems which are incredibly powerful, and basically
are for either advertising or selling (or buying).  Sorry, I almost
forgot about the computer games.  They're working on that too.

Everytime you open up your window into the web, companies worth
billions and trillions, who are basically responsible to nobody, perk
up their antennas and divert their attention to getting you to look,
click, like, share, engage, and buy.  And they track everything you do
on the web.  In fact, now that we have our phones, this process is in
continual motion, every minute, hour, day, week, month and year.
Nonstop.

And to be perfectly honest, while I don't like the way it's going in
general, I don't have a tremendous problem with it.  In the pool of
evil enterprises, shoveling advertisments to get you to buy something
you probably don't need, doesn't quite rank up there with say building
nuclear bombs or giant aircraft carriers which apparently can't
actually have planes take off from them.

My advice would be to use the web as sparingly as you can.  Use it
as a tool.  Because if you're not careful, you might think you're
consuming it, but I have a feeling it's the other way around.  At least
for me it is sometimes.

For me, the web is an endless source of distraction.  I've known this
for a while, and I'm very slowly getting ever so slightly better at
not wasting endless amounts of time producing nothing and consuming
garbage.  It's hard to stop, and given the resources and interests of
the "producers" of "content" I cut myself a little slack.

So I struggle with distraction.  In fact, the section of this post
about distraction digressed into a moderate rant on the web, which I
blame for my distraction, although I'm sure it isn't really the cause
of it, but more so an enabler of it.  I got distracted mid topic!

Why do I even care about being or feeling distracted?

That's actually a pretty good question, and one that is difficult to answer.

In some ways, I'm afforded the luxury of distraction.  I'm able to
come home and be distracted, or be distracted with my iPhone whenever
I feel like it.  In fact, the internet allows me to save so much time
in general I can afford to be distracted so much of the time.

I should just shut up and learn to love distraction.  If there ever
was a first world problem, it might be the nature of distraction.

I guess it boils down to wanting to feel like I'm doing something.
And when I'm distracted, I'm not doing anything.  I feel some guilt
when I don't read, write, code, or think (rarely cleaning is on this
list).  And I mean on top of working full-time.  In my mind, when I'm
not working for the man, I should be doing something I want to do.
For me, something I want to do isn't included in the realm of
distraction.

I want to be a better software engineer, build a solid base for future
economic security, and on occasion I want to be a super hero or character
in Star Trek.

Being distracted slows me in this progress.  Well what's the opposite
of being distracted?  I suppose it's being focused.

And being focused is hard for me.  It's hard to even think about it,
and all of the times I've failed to be focused when I've planned to
be.

I mean I read 'Deep Work', it should be easy!  That book says to just
shut off social media and work in a cave as much as you can.  I also
read a number of other books which touch on the topic in a number of
ways, and I have to say, I think 'Deep Work' strikes some good chords
but misses the mark.  It's a nice hypothesis that you need a conducive
place to do "deep work" and avoid distraction.  I'm sure it's true.
It's kind of like a book on dieting, and actually, a lot of what it
said is right I think.

But to actually do it I'm convinced is a little harder than the book
makes it out to be.  I would wager a bet that few folks who have read
the book are now deep workers, although I'm sure some are.

If the book shows anything it's that if you can perform "deep work"
you most likely will be rewarded for your effort by a society
increasingly in need of the product of such work.

I'm convinced that the path which leads to the conditions for deep
work is through habit.  The requirements for focus are as hard to
develop, because to focus on one thing is to sacrifice another.

And it would be pretty pointless to do deep work if you weren't
focused, in fact it's basically a prerequisite.

Being focused means making a choice, and when that focus is applied
consistently, what you didn't choose is left behind.  I doubt I'm the
only person who finds this hard.

And when I look at the results of my tsundoku, I feel this pretty
acutely.  In reality I will most likely never read all of these
books.  If I get up to 40% of them in the next three of four years it
will be quite an achievement.  Especially if I actually work through
them.

With each book I purchased I saw possibility, and when I browse the
titles in my list, or look at the piles on my floor, knowing I won't
get to them all is hard.

It's the same way with ideas for software.  To pursue one is to give
up another.

To focus, even relatively generally on one or two things, one
technical and one other, is taking a risk.

I can only imagine all of the deep work unrewarded by society, which I
don't think deminishes it, but in a certain context makes it a wager
taken and time spent on what may ultimately be regarded as a trivial
pursuit.

But it's this notion of reward and the need for financial security
which in many ways reduces this focus.  I find myself hedging, and
trying to keep up with the latest to ensure my position on the job
market, if something were to happen.  I battle with focusing on what I
want to focus on purely out of interest and personal desire, and
working on the "safe" choice.  In fact I always try to overlap the
two.

Perhaps this struggle for focus leads to distraction, or at least
contributes to allowing it to take hold.  But with it is time wasted,
and instead of sacrificing one thing for another, both are lost.

So again I'll give myself a break, because I've actually worked
through a lot of stuff over the past few years.  And there are
trillions of dollars of market value who make money the more I'm
distracted, so the scales are weighted a little to one side.  At least
in my case it's basically just Amazon trying to sell me books.

If you've read this far you have way too much time on your hands.  Go
do something.

Oh look a squirrel.

































