---
title: "Week in Review 7-14-2018"
date: 2018-07-13T18:16:36-04:00
draft: false
tags: [
      "musings"
]
---

Well this week wasn't quite as productive as I had hoped, but it
wasn't all bad.  My goal for waking up early and doing stuff before
heading to work didn't quite pan out -- I got up at 6am on Monday, but
the rest of the week I slept later.  Also, Netflix is proving harder
to cut out then I hoped.  I'm still convinced that getting up early
and doing things is going to be the best way to get to spend time
learning, instead of trying to do it when I get home from work.

With that being said, I did manage to finish up the exercises in
chapter one of SICP, which is good.  I've also made some headway with
exercises in chapter two, so there is forward progress.

This weekend I have to finish up the work for module two of the
Nand2Tetris course, but that shouldn't take too long.

I'd also like to finish up implementing the Monkey interpreter in C#
which I started a month ago or so.  I still haven't added arrays and
hash tables to the implementation yet.  The author is coming out with
a second book which shows how to compile Monkey to bytecode, so I've
got a little time to work with before that comes out.

But all in all I may have made my ambitions a little too great for
this week.  My best chances for cutting back on Netflix will probably
be if I can hold off on starting a new series.  Star Trek Voyager is
pulling me in just enough where I want to keep watching, and it's too
easy to keep watching when I can just play it on one monitor.  I've
got another few seasons, so probably around 40 hours of Voyager left
to watch.

I did manage to wake up early one day.  Next week I'll try to wake up
early at least two days.  Maybe I'll get up and try heading to
Starbucks by 5 or 5:30 and working from there.  That's what I did the
last time I started to wake up early and I did that for months at a
time, so I know its possible.

At least on Sunday I managed to write a technical blog post, so I've
been keeping up on writing.  This is basically a pointless post, but I
am trying to keep myself honest.  Adding up all of my Netflix watching
hours was disturbing to say the least.  I'd much rather be able to say
I put 11,000 hours to good use instead of mindlessly watching
streaming video.





